Oct. 11

We dove right in.
Repotted some tumeric for sale in the store. The bulbs on root vegetables are
called "rizomes." Marianne is a lovely and vibrant woman. Warm and candid, but
very direct. Cooper is a tall man with a smart, wintry moustache. Both are light
in the heart and erudite. The banter between them bespeaks many fulfilling years
together. It is comforting.

Coop has been metalworking since he was young. He contracted polio as a child
and had to cope with the paralyzation of his left side. To help build his
coordination and confidence his father introduced him to metalworking. He took
to it keenly and was apprenticed to a severe German goldsmith who was by all
appearances a Nazi who had escaped to rural Alabama. Coop said he kept a .45
automatic pistol at the small of his back at all times, and if a person of color
or Jewish creed walked into his shop he would snarl at them to "Get Out!" His
family had apparently been goldsmithing since the 1600's

The accomodations are cozy and the food is resplendent. My fellow intern had
homemade beer decanting in a Carlo Rossi jug on the cabinet.
I think I'm going to like it here.

Oct. 12

Overcast.
Slept like a velvet child. The mattress has to be some kind of memory foam
material. Rolled a cigarette and had eggs and cereal at the lodge. Marianne went
over what she wanted us to accomplish today and talked about her dealings with
the permaculture institute about doing a workshop for a group of 35 people. She
did not like the numbers. After breakfast I watered the beds in the greenhouse.

Proper watering technique:
1. Saturate soil with a light coat of water and let it settle. This prepares the
soil to properly distribute water in the bed without a lot of runoff/soil erosion.
2. Make a second pass after waiting a minute or two. This solidifies the routes
the water will take and gives the roots a sip.
3. After another couple of minutes saturate the ground a third time to provide
adequate moisture to plants/root systems.

After watering we weeded sorrel from the vacant beds in the greenhouse. The root
systems on those sprouts! Make sure to dig deep and really root out those creepers.
We're going to plant brussels and leeks tomorrow. I also fed and cooped the chickens
and ducks. The chicks laid five eggs today.

This evening at dinner Marianne had reached an understanding with Rico, the
globetrotting permaculture workshop guru. Apparently, if I stay through May and
help out with the workshop I can get my PDI certification for free! (a $1400 value)
Tomorrow is my turn to cook dinner and I am very nervous. "Super Fresh" beer
is incredible.

Oct. 13

Overcast.
Woke up with Jordan's alarm at 5:15 A.M. Supposedly, the internet is fast enough
to stream in the wee hours of the morning. I have yet to be convinced. Breakfast
scintillated with conversation. Marianne told about a man named Peter who works
for something called "World Group." Her conversation with Coop went something like
this:

M: "So, I drove over there just to check out the landscaping and two black SUVs
pulled out in front of me like this '/\'."
C: "Black SUVs? Yeah, he's definitely in the Russian mob."
M: "He's Polish."
C: "Well, Poland was in the Soviet Bloc, it's close enough."
M: "You're crazy."
C: "Be friendly to him anyway."

Today we changed the wood chip bedding in the chicken coop, planted our brussel
and leek sprouts and strung twine to encourage pea plants to latch onto it.
Jordan planted the peas in the big hugel a week and a half ago or so.

Proper sprout planting technique:
1. Gently divide the root/mulch mixture in half vertically
2. Repeat a second time splitting the roots/mulch into quarters
3. Lay the sprout in the soil with the newly formed legs extended horizontally
4. Pack in soil about a half inch up the stalk
5. Water two cycles to calm excited roots

Also, the crows this morning were all distraught about something in the woods.
They were cawing so loudly that both Jordan and I became nervous.

I made bone in, skin on chicken breasts.
I browned them until crispy on the stove top, glazed them with a mixture of
honey (farm honey, just amazing), chili powder and lemon juice and set them in
the stove to bake off. Then, I made spanish rice with pablano peppers, onion and
tomato and put some cherry tomatoes in a little olive oil and balsamic vinegar
on the side.

It went over well. Coop took one look at it and said, "Well, this is just
delightful!" Over dinner Marianne went over various food labelling and what they
indicated:

Non GMO Project Verified:
"While the Non-GMO Project Verified seal is not a 'GMO free' claim, it is trustworthy,
defensible, transparent and North America's only independent verification for products
made according to best practices for GMO avoidance."

Translation: You pay us $3000 and you get our seal on your product verifying your
donation. Marianne investigated these yahoos personally. This is exactly what their
automated prompts lead her to.

Certified Naturally Grown:
"The inspection forms are designed to walk people who don't know a lot about farming
through a meaningful inspection process."

This seal makes absolutely no sense. Basically these "inspection forms" are handed out at farmer's
markets and the consumer judges for themselves whether or not the food has been
poisoned.

100% Natural ALL NATURAL:
"FDA policy was not intended to address food production methods, such as the use
of pesticides, nor did it explicitly address food processing or manufacturing methods,
such as thermal technologies, pasteurization, or irradiation. The FDA also did not
consider whether the term 'natural' should describe any nutritional or other health
benefit."

This one is pretty self explanatory, it renders the seal meaningless.

Organically Grown:
Not inspected by anyone. Farmer's word.

USDA Organic:
3rd party trained inspector that reports directly to the USDA. Black or Green Label.

Marianne said when her farm was first certified USDA Organic they gave her a stack
of papers a quarter inch thick full of accepted chemicals. Three years later they
came back with a three ring binder full. Corps like Dole, Del Monte and Green Giant
have successfully lobbied to expand acceptable poisons in food and soil. Organic means
what corporate America says it means.

Demeter Certified Biodynamic:
3rd party trained inspector. In USA, must pass USDA Certified Organic and maintain
for five years before applying. International Certification.

Biodynamic means that less than five percent of everything on your farm (seeds, fertilizer
water, fuel, etc) comes from outside your property. Everything is self sustaining with a focus
on design and soil enrichment. Marianne failed their first inspection because the
topsoil didn't have a variegated enough swab of insects. She says it was because
it was hot outside; and apparently they weren't using the right fermented manure, or something.

This is the only seal found on foodstuffs that means anything. Everything else is literally poison.
She also listed "The Dirty Dozen" or fruits and vegetables that annually test positive
for more than ten different poisons: Celery, Peaches, Strawberries, Apples, Domestic Blueberries,
Nectarines, Sweet Bell Peppers, Spinach, Kale, Collard Greens, Cherries, Potatoes,
Imported Grapes and Lettuce.

This is because they are grown in fields where the soil has been raped of all
nutrients and sustained by soluble fertilizers and pesticides. You can't wash
it off.

Had a chat with Jordan this evening. He's a real nice kid.

Oct. 14

Overcast, then sunny.
Today I planted kohlrabi while Jordan fretted over a decision to spread topsoil
over our brussels and leeks; It acted as a earthen sponge and prevented water
from seeping down into the packed clay we had planted the starts in.

After suitably aerating/admiring my charmingly asymmetrical rows of plant life
we headed into Kenbridge to water at Coop and Marianne's store "Twigs &
Berries." It is a modest outfit that does a healthy business, both literally
and figuratively. They must have had two hundred trees that needed to be watered
and apparently we are paid for the work we do at the store.

It was a tedious task.
But, we carried on.
Also, I ate a honeycrisp apple that tasted like it must have fallen from the
tree of knowledge itself.

We drove through Kenbridge to Victoria. The flora of southern Virginia bears
a striking resemblance to the flora back home. The towns are small and unassuming
and each one seemed to be doing its own iteration of a fall festival.

We visited the Food Lion and bought beer, came home and bottled beer, then drank
beer and ate overstuffed quesadillas courtesy of Coop. They were absolutely delicious.
Marianne made some guacamole and we ate and drank until we unspokenly and unanimously
decided that it was time to retire.

I hope that they like me. I really feel at home here.

Oct. 15

Overcast, again.
Sundays start later than the rest of the week here. I slept in until almost seven.
Jordan and I made pancakes and scrambled eggs for breakfast. He played oldies
on his phone and it really brightened up the whole experience. It reminded me
of when Kelly and I used to wake up, play old cassettes and dance around the
kitchen in a lingering haze of alcohol and infatuation.

Sunday is also the one day off we get a week. But, as soon as breakfast had
concluded Marianne petitioned me to fix her laptop/wireless printer arrangement.
Luckily, I had the thing humming in less than five minutes. Turns out I just had
to reboot it and remove a tattered piece of yellow card stock from the drum (>.<)

The printer malfunctioned again. Turns out it's a hardware issue that is beyond
my limited skillset.

Jordan and I took the canoe out on the pond and fished, traded stories, bonded.
It was fun. I caught a bluegill with a fat grub I dug out from under the compost
heap.

Marianne made quiche and bacon for dinner. Dinners are my favorite part of the day.
She wants our winter project to be designing and building a wallapini on the
property. A wallapini is essentially a subterranean terrarium. You dig 8-9 feet
below the ground and with the radiant heat you are able to grow lemons, olives, etc.
In the dead of winter. The only problem is draining away and sequestering excess
moisture.

I've fumbled my way into an elite permaculture think tank. We experiment, think
laterally and build a more Edenic garden every day. It is scary to think of the
road not taken. I hesistate to imagine what my life would be like if I weren't
here.

Tomorrow we bake and can apples in the morning while it rains.

Oct. 16

Light rain.
Slept until six. After breakfast we skinned, cored, boiled and canned an entire
bushel of apples.

Proper Canning Technique:
1. Sterilize jars, lids and bands in boiling water for at least ten minutes.
2. Promptly fill jars leaving a half inch of empty space at the top. Time is a
factor
3. Tap jars on solid surface until all air is removed. Very important.
4. Cap jars and give them a quick bath in cool water.
5. Wait for cap to pop indicating an airtight seal.
6. Bathe once more in cool water and store.

Bands and jars can be reused, but caps can not because of the rubber stopper.

Short day today. We pulled up the ginger that was planted in the spring. Wow!
She grows Peruvian Gold and it smells magnificent. We must have harvested 15 lbs
of ginger from that little 3x5 plot.

I spent a little time up at the hammock, but it was chilly here today so it was
a brief visit. I can understand now why people take a nap in the afternoon. When
you wake up with the sun and work all morning it feels nice to recline after lunch.

Marianne made bison stew for dinner and I finished my list of things I would like
to learn while I'm here. She addressed a couple and then we got to talking more
about the walipini. As it stands now the entire structure is going to be about
14 feet floor to ceiling; with ditches running across the bottom covered by gangplanks
to serve as cold sinks and french drain pipes ran through those to wick moisture
into irrigation ditches on the outside. Construction won't start until Feb. So,
we'll just be doing the first planting whenever I leave in May.

I feel great. All this healthy food, exercise and fresh air are already doing
wonders. I wish I hadn't left my headphones in the car.

Oct. 17

Partly cloudy and COLD!

Busy day. They are expecting the first hard frost tonight. So, we spent the day
tamping down the greenhouses, harvesting peppers, okra and tumeric that will not survive
the low temperatures and hacking down the plants/a few evergreens that were growing
between the greenhouses.

Jordan and I made cinnamon swirl bread this afternoon. Tuesday evenings are typically
"fend for yourself" in the kitchen, but our confection had just come out of the
oven and no one could resist. So, we all had apples, eggs and bread for dinner.
I made Coop laugh for the first time today. This morning he also spoke to me
about computers at length, so I think he may be coming around.

I am dog tired, so tonights will be a short entry.
I want to sleeeeeep.

Oct. 18

Oh! It's freezing!
I've been doing the birds in the morning and this morning I had to wear a coat
and gloves. The expected frost came and took no quarter. Had eggs and cereal with
Coop and then watered the greenhouse and potted plants by the cottage. Marianne
said she would be home from an appointment with Farm Bureau by 9:30, but it's
going on 10:30 and still no word.

One thing that really strikes me about this place is the fact that no doors are ever
locked. Marianne and Coop's living quarters are always open to us (the laundry and
various sundry items are located there,) and all they knew about me prior to my
arrival is that I had an interest in working on their farm.

Coop always has a glass of whiskey cut with water before bed. The liquor is kept
in a wood chest in the common room of the lodge. Considering my predilection for
overindulgence in spirituous beverages it would be quite easy for me to go to the
lodge after dinner and help myself to as much as I pleased. As yet, this hasn't
been an alluring prospect. Because, if I drink too much at night my performance
the next day would be impacted; and being that I take a lot of pride
in my work here, the idea of failing to complete my duties effectively is
enough of a deterrent.

Marianne functions very much in a top-down managerial capacity here on the farm.
Jordan and I do all the planting, watering, harvesting and caring for the plants
and animals. As such, I am able to directly experience and reap the rewards of a
job well done. This is of paramount importance to maintaining an effective workforce.
"A happy worker is a busy worker." Most pedestrian jobs in modern society reward
outstanding performance with more responsibility at the same pay grade. There is
no incentive (other than hollow titles and tokens) to take pride in your work.
And, being that the suits at the top getting the raises and bonuses depend more
and more on energy slaves (an average of 100 for the average middle class
person in a first world economy) this model is completely unsustainable. The more
disconnected a person is from their community/sources of subsistence (food/energy/entertainment)
the easier it becomes to fall into cycles of addiction/dependence.

When you produce more than you consume it really alleviates the burden of first
world shame/guilt and perpetuates itself into the development of hardier self-reliant
and altruistic behavioral patterns.

Marianne had to pick up her son in Lynchburg today, so we had chinese take-out
for dinner. It actually really hit the spot. Marianne told about a friend of hers
named Anne who was a Playboy bunny in the '70's and is responsible for developing
and manufacturing Blackberry cell phones. Apparently, she moved here to open
and manufacturing plant, but decided against it and now telecommutes to California
everyday. She and her ex-pro footballer husband are to join us at Thanksgiving
dinner. It should be interesting.

Then, we got to talking about Ben Falk and how he used to save his urine in jars
by the fireplace to keep it from freezing in the winter so he could water his
plants with it. This lead Coop into a story from his early blacksmithing days
when he and his friends had read that a greek blacksmith learned that nordic peoples
steeled their metals in urine because the nitrates helped to harden the metal. So,
Coop says: "We gathered a big bucket of piss and got one of the whelps to throw
some molten iron in. Of course, it vaporized instantly and smelled so bad it was
literally painful." I'm guessing the cost outweighed the benefits in that arrangement.

We filled the greenhouse with cauliflower, kolrabi and brussel sprouts today. It
looks really nice. Jordan's parents are coming to visit this weekend, so tomorrow
we get to work on weedwhacking and sprucing the place up prior to their arrival.

Oct. 19

I've been falling asleep around nine recently. This morning I woke up at four.
Today we watered around the greenhouse and nearly finished weeding the orchard.
We also weeded "The Cricket Box" which is the place near the enclosure with the
hammock. There's actually a really nice stone path and firepit there, but you
never would have known for all the weeds.

The chickens made a daring escape from their enclosure today, twice! We thought
we had hemmed them in after our first pass, but there was a recess in the netting
that they were able to sneak under. I think they are pretty well closed in now,
but apparently this is a relatively routine exercise for the birds.

At dinner Marianne and Coop seriously contemplated buying a '57 Ford pickup is
being sold by a man between here and Victoria. He wants 12, but Marianne won't
offer more than 10. Coop really wants to buy it.

She also talked about the water witch that came and "divined" their well for them.
He uses a tender cherry branch to do it and has never missed once. She said she
was going to call on him whenever we start to build the walipini. He sounds
like an interesting character.

Tomorrow Jordan is going to the store and I'm pulling more dead plants. My hands
are becoming calloused.

Oct. 20

It felt like I watered the entire property today. I lugged that hose around like
it was my job. I cook dinner on Fridays, so I made Italian sausage and kale in a
red sauce with onions and garlic bread. It went over well.

This evening we stargazed at the upper cottage because there was supposed to be a
meteor shower. The peak is supposed to be at 2 A.M. so, we didn't see too much.
The sky is amazing out here at night. The big dipper was larger than I have ever
seen it.

Oct. 21

Clear.
Jordan's parents arrived today. His father is a pediatrician and his mother is
an ultrasound technician. They seem like nice people. We had venison stew and salad
for dinner.

I tried to make myself scarce today so that Jordan and his parents could enjoy
their time together.

Dinner went on for an hour longer than usual discussing various things of
little consequence. I was bored to tears.

Day off tomorrow.

Oct. 22

Partly cloudy.
Jordan went to Richmond with his parents to visit his brother today; and Coop
took Michael to Charlotte, so it was just Marianne and I on the farm. I went up
to the cricket box early and swung in the hammock while I spoke to Cleofe on the
phone. She is doing well. She said she was more than a little jealous of my
current circumstances. I told her she should move out here too and she replied
that she was too old.

On the way back to the cottage Marianne pulled up in her truck and we measured out
the barn that is currently under construction. Then, we sat on the porch and had
a pleasant chat about what I though of the farm and what she and Coop thought of
me. She said they were thrilled to have me here and really meant it.

I spent the rest of the day reading and then had soup for supper. Jordan and Coop
made it home one after the other around 9:30.

Oct. 23

Overcast.
Today I finished cutting back and uprooting all the dead plants in the orchard.
Verbena smells really good; it took all morning.

In the afternoon Marianne took her son Michael back to Lynchburg, so Jordan and
I just kind of hung around and did nothing of any tremendous consequence.

This evening we got the first significant rain on the property in 10 weeks. It
was a joyous occasion. Also, they put the roofing and the windows in the barn today.
Marianne has paddocks for birthing in the back and wants to put a kitchen and cold
storage in the front. She's going to have to talk to the health department about
that one.

Oct. 24

Sunny.
Because of the rain yesterday Marianne had us walk around the property and assess
any faults in their swale and burm system. There were a few place were water wasn't
being sufficiently distributed near the upper cottage, but overall things seemed
to be functioning as intended. We also refurnished the chicken and duck enclosures
with fresh wood shavings and harvested the last of the tumeric.

I sent Michael diagrams of the walipini we intend to build in Feb. I'm still
waiting for a response. He told me that he and Jenna were doing fine. I was relieved
to hear it.

Jordan and I went fishing this evening. He caught a catfish and a bass and I caught
two bluegill. Both of my fish swallowed their hooks, so the removal was stressful
for all concerned.

I'm very tired.

Oct. 26

Clear.
Today Jordan and I finished weeding, planted oregano/parsley and mulched three
75 yard rows in the orchard. They looked very nice afterward. Jordan prepared
and baked egg dish with cream cheese, sausage and potatoes for dinner. It was delicious.

Marianne talked about the differences between genetically modified organisms and
genetically engineered organisms. Essentially, genetically modified organisms are
perfectly natural. Any hybridization that occurs due to cross pollination or human
intervention is "genetically modified." So, most apples that you eat would be considered
GMO. Then, there are genetically engineered organisms, which come to life in a
laboratory and are usually mating two things that would never be in the same realm
in the first place.

Apparently, the first genetically engineered organism was a splicing of DNA between
a strawberry and arctic char (a fish.) So, that Monsanto farmers could grow strawberries
in Alaska. (I had thought that GMOs were such frankensteins.)

The push for ostracization of GMO's is just a bulwark against what is really going
into your body. Basically, they have manipulated the semantics so that people believe
naturally occuring alterations in plant genetics are bad. Most people won't buy
a fruit/vegetable they don't recognize, and pin you to a banana that has been bred with
a seal so it can grow in arctic climates. Also, she mentioned a 5 year urine study
done in the US that found Round Up pest killer in traceable amounts in 99% of participants.
A lot of this I think is trivial to an extent, I mean, you're going to die anyway.
But, clean food tastes so good.

The prospect seems unreasonable. What with global acts of terrorism, traffic snarls,
political strife at home and abroad. People want their intake of energy to be
easy and, most of all, cheap. But, from a bottom up perpective, if people weren't
eating poison all the time they would feel better. If your feeling good you think
clearer and if the world as a whole thought clearer by even an infinitesimal margin
it would be a profoundly different place.

Oct. 27

Partly cloudy.
Today Jordan and I went to the store to help Marianne dress pots for the main drag
of both Kenbridge and Victoria. We had to lift 26 120lb pots both in and out of a truck.
It was tiring. But, I relished the opportunity to be able to do a community service
without being so ordered by a court. I got to hold my head up high and give firm
handshakes and be readily appreciated for my labours.

I made $48. Nice.

I made naked fried chicken and scalloped sweet potatoes for dinner. I turned out
ok. I was not impressed with it, but everyone was very supportive. Marianne leaves
for Florida tomorrow, and has high hopes for what me and Jordan should accomplish
in her absence.

The expectations are high here, but it is good to be challenged.

I will sleep well tonight.

Oct. 30

Sunny.
Marianne left for Florida on Saturday to get out ahead of the tropical storm.
Sunday was gloomy with the gift of about 2" of rain. I sat in the hammock for
awhile and read. I started a new book called "Are We Smart Enough to Know How
Smart Animals Are." by Frans De Waal. It is a very entertaining piece on animal
cognition and understanding. Crows are self aware, capable of fashioning and using
tools and perform rituals such as funerary rights for fallen comrades. Who knew
a bird could lead such a rich inner life?

Today we are weeding and mulching more beds in the orchard. We planted some parsley
and I'm going to get the floating bed in the pond cleaned up this afternoon. Coop
made beans and rice for dinner yesterday and just knocked it out of the park.
It was truly a delight to savour and I hope there is some left for lunch today.

We worked from 8 A.M. to 4 P.M. today. Very tired.

Nov. 3

Partly cloudy.
Yesterday Jordan and I worked at the store until noon. Marianne had trouble with
her AccuPOS software and I was able to get it working until just after I left.
This seems to be a recurring theme, as none of the others in our company know diddly
about computers. Something goes wrong, they call on me to fix it and then just as
I am moving on to the next task they inadvertently do something to foul it up again.
Oh, well.

Marianne brought soil samples from the upper cottage, our farm and a tobacco field
home from work. She filled the jars with water and as they settled they separated
into layers of organic material/fluid/sediment. The dirt from the tobacco field
developed a disconcerting foam on the top from all the latent chemicals. It was
vaguely interesting. She just went on and on about how great our dirt was.

Tonight I am cooking pork carnitas tacos with refried black beans and guacamole.
This is the most comfortable I have been with a menu since I got here, so I'm
confident that the rest of the party will be impressed.

Well, dinner was a resounding success. I don't think i've ever received so many
compliments on my cooking; the most complimentary by far was the fact that I cooked
enough for 8 and my three compatriots cleaned up the whole spread. Coop goes:
"Alright, let's put it to a vote. Who thinks that Robert should cook every night?"
I was voted down three to one.

We talked about the future of food and its influence on global politics and then
I did all the dishes. Now I'm going to bed.

Nov. 4

Rainy.
Do nothing Saturday morning. We are supposed to help Gene inoculate logs with
mycelium later today. I did not want to get out of bed this morning. I was having
a series of the most vivid dreams I have had in quite some time. In the first I
was living with Kelly and some other person in a nook of what resembled the walled
city of Kowloon. In the second I watched the third story of a residential building
collapse into the street and then kissed the bejewelled hand of some Latin mob
boss and in the third I was sitting next to a fountain and these amphibious creatures
were puffing themselves up with air and kind of gliding across the surface of the
water, but one of them had gotten his hind legs caught on a railing and literally
tore himself in two attempting to extricate them. Sub-conscious memory is strange.

I gave the chickens some zuchini this morning, but neglected to chop it up and
the birds acted like they had never seen such a thing before. I should go out and
try to make them more bite size but I don't want to get soaking wet doing so.

I bought a bunch of winter wear from a consignment shop in Kenbridge. Luckily, I
am making money faster than I can spend it here. It is a nice change of pace. Oh,
and I spoke with Gerren about the money he was supposed to send me. He had a convenient
excuse and told me that I would see half of it with his next pay check. I'm not
going to count on it.

Gene is a man of about thirty with an apparent passion for fungi. He is also very
apparently a meth user. Having been mired in that microculture for some time I am
quite familiar with all the tells. But, Marianne and Coop are not shy about giving
those with unfortunate upbringings or poor impulse control a shot at positively
affecting their lives with something constructive *Ahem* One of the employees at
their store; who is one of the sweetest guys I have ever met, was raised by a
derelict mother and abusive step-father who used to make him fight other children
for the purposes of gambling. Apparently, that is something that happens.Anyway,
he was on the wrong side of things when he applied for a job there and is
now finishing up nursing school. It is truly inspiring what people are capable of
when they are put in a nurturing environment.

Nov. 6

Partly cloudy.
Today we planted lavendar, pineapple guava, verbena, pansies and black raspberries
on the berm beside Coop's shop. Then we spread newspaper, wet it down and mulched
the area. Apparently, this does wonders for the soil. It was hard work, but it
beats sitting around the cottage all day.

Also, I was thinking about possible moisture barriers for the walipini that didn't
include plastics and came up with pine or peat tar. I don't know how it would fair
with the clay we have around here, but Marianne thought it a stroke of brilliance.

Nov. 7

Rainy.
A brief epithet while i'm thinking.
I've been working on some music while I have been here. I have a very specific
attitude when it comes to "art." I don't generally appreciate works that are too
explicit. I don't like being told what to think. So, when your headspace accomodates
a more implicit or even nebulous sphere the viewer/listener has just as much influence
on interpretation as the producer; upon seeing/hearing the person has added their
own blot to the Rorschach. As such, the work belongs just as much to you as it does
to anyone else. Art should always be for arts sake.

Nov. 13

Cloudy and cold.
Marianne is finally getting over her cold, but the weather is yet miserable so
we won't be doing much today. After breakfast I proposed the idea of growing
wasabi here on the farm (due to lack of domestic availability and market price)
and after sending her some literature Marianne jumped on it. So, we'll be
planting wasabi bulbs later this week.

We finally moved the chicken coop yesterday. It is now beside the lower greenhouse
and it looks (and smells) much nicer than it did in its previous position. We
tamped it up pretty solid and so far have had no escapees; this will not last.

I've been doing a lot of reading. I need to find a project to work on for days like
today. I'm afraid they shall be witnessed in greater numbers as the year draws
to a close.

Marianne made chicken soup Italian style for dinner. We talked about holidays of
yesteryear and had brownies and ice cream for dessert. I have never seen Coop's
face light up like it did when we told him we picked up some ice cream from the
store. His birthday is this Sunday, so we will be having pecan pie and lemoncello.
I am excited.

Nov. 15

Partly cloudy/Overcast.
Yesterday, Jordan and I went mucking over the river and through the woods. It was
fun, but the flora here is much more intent upon defending itself than it is back
home. There were briars, brambles and thorns on every living thing. We even discovered a
plant that had thorns protruding from the leaves. Suffice it to say, we were both
happy to make it home in one piece.

Today we planted some fig trees in the orchard and learned how to properly prepare
onion and garlic sets for planting. It is a good idea to throw some garlic into
any garden as it is a natural insect repellant. Then, we straightened up the upper
greenhouse, which according to Marianne was "used as a giant wastebasket while I
was away for the summer." We loaded an entire trailer full of warped wood and unusable
plastic and then trimmed down the errant grasses and spread compost across the bulk
of the interior.

This evening Marianne made loaded baked sweet potatoes and heated the leftover
chicken soup. It was delicious. We began talking about the Thanksgiving menu and
she mentioned that she was going to make a chocolate mousse with raspberry joliet
for dessert (along with pumpkin pie, of course) and Coop mentioned that she should
make a "Bomb." A bomb is a ball of ice cream surrounded by a sponge cake, surrounded
by a chocolate cake and encased in a chocolate ganache. Marianne's response
was an unquestionable "No," but she added that to properly produce a bomb she would
have to visit a Jewish community center. Jordan and I kind of look at each other
and before we could expel our "why's?" Coop affected the gravest tone I have heard
him use to this day and said: "The Jews have the chocolate sauce."

Apparently, the recipe for an ideal chocolate sauce is jealously guarded by the
Jewish community. Marianne said that in Memphis they started taking orders for this
sauce at the start of autumn and by Christmas you might as well just give up your
chances until the following year.

Hmm.

Tomorrow we will actually set the garlic and onion and I am going to attempt to
hem a pair of jeans that I have. Next week the store starts getting Christmas trees
delivered, so we will be put to work unbinding and setting them up. Good day today.
I am glad Marianne is feeling better.

Nov. 19

Rainy.
Coop's birthday!
Jordan left for Newport News Friday after we finished planting what seemed like
bottomless bags of garlic and onions respectively. Always plant onions/garlic with
the root side down. I made pork chops adobo style with fried green tomatoes and
two cheese grits for dinner.

Yesterday I watered the greenhouse (which is coming along nicely,) dumped some
barrels that are going to be saved from Marianne's defunct aquaponics operation
and mulched "The Labyrinth" which is a intricately composed series of beds north
of the orchard. Then, I hemmed my jeans (which worked fine, I used Marianne's sewing
machine.) Coop attempted to make a smothered pork loin for dinner, but miscalculated
the cook time so we ended up eating baked potatoes, broccoli and bread. It was
tasty, but I woke up with hunger pains this morning.

I had an incredibly vivid dream about Christine Friday evening; one where the
subconscious landscape is articulated down to the finest detail, so that it convincingly
constitutes a tangential reality. I remember looking at her and saying "This is a dream
isn't it?"

Today someone is coming to pick up the aquaponics stuff Marianne doesn't want to
keep and Marianne is making pasta and pecan pie for dinner. Jordan should be returning
sometime today. I'll probably read and make some phonecalls in the afternoon.

Nov. 20

Clear.
Moving all the gravel and stone from the aquaponics setup was a terrible chore.
It didn't help that everyone else involved was 50+ and had legitimate excuses
for standing around and gabbing while I did all the heavy lifting. It took four
trailer loads of buckets filled with gravel to finally clear it all out. Sheesh!

Jordan made it back safely and dinner was very satisfying. You really can't beat
pecan pie a la mode.

Today, we finished removing all of the scrap wood from the upper greenhouse and
laid shade cloth, then covered it in mulch; it looks very nice now. I think we're
finally going to eat the interrupted smothered pork loin from Saturday for dinner.
I am very hungry.

Nov. 24

Clear.
Jordan left for Woodstock Wednesday afternoon and dropped me at the store on his
way out of town. I stuck with Marianne, Coop, Dylan, Tiffany and Jess to help
unload, detwine and setup Christmas trees/wreaths. We worked well into the evening
but the store looks beautiful. After we got home marianne and I made pumpkin and
chocolate pie for Thanksgiving dessert.

Thanksgiving day was spent preparing foodstuffs. We made turkey, green bean casserole,
corn bread stuffing, mashed purple yams, mashed potatoes, asparagus and cranberry
sauce. The turkey was the most succulent, flavorful bird I have ever eaten. We stuffed
it with the cornbread, apples, oranges and lemon and then when it was nearly done
we removed it from the oven, separated the skin and stuffed it with thin slices
of lemon. Delicious.

Marianne's son Michael, Anne (the blackberry lady) and her husband Mike (played for
the 49ers in the 70s) joined us for dinner. They were all delightful. Mike came
down with a then undiagnosable condition in the '90s and said he lost 60lbs in
four months, but he is 6'6" and still quite formidable. They now think that it
is side effects of some type of Lymes disease. We told stories and ate too much
and it was all quite pleasant.

It's going to be smooth sailing for awhile since the temperatures are below
freezing and Jordan is away until Sunday. So, I'm going to read and probably work
on some computer stuff if my machine holds out.

I've been watching Ken Burns' documentary on the Civil War (essential viewing for any
conscientious American, in my opinion) and hearing the diaries and journals of noble
men like Robert E. Lee, Abraham Lincoln, John Brown and Frederick Douglass; men
who were often forced into leadership positions due entirely to their virtue,
has provided ample fodder for reflection.

Since I became cognizant of the bodies that govern the American people it has
never been a question of whether or not a politician is a good and honest person.
More practically, it is an assessment of just how thoroughly falsehood and greed
have riven their character. I don't necessarily question how we came to this
appalling state of affairs, but I do wonder how we might ever extricate ourselves
from it. I weep for my country, and if things should continue to fester and spoil
as they have I should not like to call her home any longer.

Nov. 29

Clear.
It has been quite a week. Sunday, we had guests again for dinner. They were much
more engaging and down to earth than our Thanksgiving day visitors. The two of them
own a vinyard in Napa and winter there, so they were stopping by to say "so long
for now's" and have dinner. We had cocktails and hors d'oeuvres, then sparkling
wine and ham biscuits and finally some of their old vine zin' and venison stew.
It was very pleasant.

We have been working all week on reclaiming the upper portion of the property that
was neglected while Marianne was away for the summer. We cut the grass, mulched
the trees and the today we took bush axes and a flamethrower and burned out the swales.
It was an apropos outlet for any latent frustrations accumulated over the weeks
of weeding and not much else. The blaze did get away from us toward the end as
everything is precariously dry; and I lost all the hair on my forearms/nearly
melted the soles of my boots getting it reigned in.

Marianne seems very happy with our progress and our focus will be shifting toward
the upper property from here on out, as the orchard and lower hugels are all bedded
down for the winter and won't require any more maintenance. Coop has nearly
finished his current commission and will begin work on the target range soon.

Also, there is a workshop upstate at the end of January that I am going to go to.
You can find information on it at VABF.org. Essentially, it is a large gathering
of farmers the present classes on a wide array of topics and you just kind of pick
and choose what you would like to take part in. Marianne offered to cover half the
cost of the tuition, but Jordan and I still need to make reservations at the hotel
which used to be a popular destination resort for U.S. presidents in the fledgling
days of our nation.

I think I gave myself mild tennis elbow swinging that machete around.

Dec. 7

Overcast.
It has been quite a week. We finished mulching every last thing in the orchard;
down to the last blueberry bush. Then, we laid compost, soaker hoses and mulched
the last two asparagus rows. We planted grey owls and holly on the upper property.
On Tuesday we made a bonfire with all the trees/shrubs we removed from the dam.
It was pretty impressive, but burned incredibly quickly. We roasted sausages and
marshmallows once the blaze became managable.

Marianne had been experiencing pain in her shoulder and went to the doctor yesterday;
turns out she pulled a muscle that is now inflamed and pinching a nerve, plus she
has shingles. She was perscribed antibiotics and ordered not to lift anything. But,
she is prone to being stubborn and neglecting orders when it is not convenient so
we will see how that shakes out.

Today we have only to check the greenhouse and lay out row covers as snow is in the
forecast for the first time this weekend. Everyone is excited with the exception
of Coop, because snowfall just equates to an extra long list of chores in his head.
If we do in fact receive significant snowfall I am going to spend the day sledding
hills on the upper property.

Marianne's son Michael has been spending a lot of time here lately. From what I can
gather he is between jobs and girlfriends. He is very nice, but is a self-styled
macho man and some of his opinions about women are problematic. He is also a very
picky eater that must be accomodated when planning meals.

We plan to have another big bonfire before we leave later this month. It will
be kind of a send-off/celebration of closing the store in town for a month. I am
ready for a change of scenery. We rarely leave the property. Once spring rolls
around that will change.

Dec. 11

Clear and bitterly cold.
We got our first snow this week; it ended up being around five inches. There
was some Napa cabbage outside the greenhouse that was going to die if we didn't
use it so I decided to make Hungarian style stuffed cabbage with bacon and sauerkraut
for dinner. I was about half way through the preparation when Marianne came in to
tell me that we were going to have +2 for the evening meal. I adjusted accordingly
and the food turned out splendidly. Although, I managed to burn the first layer
of skin off of the inside of my mouth while taste testing so I didn't get to experience
it as completely as everyone else.

Marianne and Coop are starting a neo-sharecropping project on their property next
year to encourage young farmers that aren't equipped to purchase and maintain their
own plot of land. Basically, they go through a rigorous interview process and then
live here on the farm, cultivate the land and grow their own produce that can be sold
in Marianne and Coop's shop. They don't lease or pay rent and get to keep everything
they sell in return for making the land arable. I think it is a wonderful idea.

The kids who came to visit were from Annapolis, MD and seemed very nice. Both of them
had business/food service backgrounds and seemed genuinely interested in a change of
pace from the bourgeois city life afforded to them. They plan to return in June and
start their little experiment.

Today I am going with Coop and Michael to help with the installation of the railings
Coop has been working on for the past year. After hearing about my ignorance and
inexperience with nearly all things mechanical Michael has taken it upon himself
to tutor me in all things shop related. I should actually come out of this with
quite the education in the agricultural/techincal arts. Since I have been doing moreso
than just being fed information it has happened organically without me really noticing.
So far I can:
plant a seed
tell what soil lacks/requires to be productive
sheet mulch
deduce blight and other health issues with vegetation
companion plant
compost
design a functioning berm/swale system
run a trout line
identify an animal based on scat
brew beer
etc

It seems like every time I talk to Marianne about the length of my stay she tacks
on an extra week. She now has me staying until June or longer. She has also talked
about putting in a good word for me with Rico Zook who is running the PDC in May.
Apparently, he is always looking for people to help out with permaculture workshops
in India; which is something that I would be paid for.

I'm excited to come home.

Dec. 12

There's going to be a changing of the guard here. Marianne took me aside yesterday
and asked my opinion about it; she prefaced by saying, "I always play with all my
cards on the table and I'm usually confident about who I'm playing cards with."
Of course, this seemed very ominously theatrical to me, but she's getting ready
to nudge Jordan off the farm and wanted my opinion before she set her plan into
action.

Now, Jordan is a nice Christian kid with wealthy parents and bachelors in agricultural
science. But, Marianne believes that he is not cut out for this (I agree) and by
letting him hang out here and forestall having to enter the real world she is not
only enabling him, but keeping someone who is genuinely interested in homesteading
from tapping the well of information and experience that is available here. He has
never had a job, he has no personality whatsoever and when Marianne and Coop aren't
around he frequently phones it in as far as labour is concerned.

I feel for him because obviously he has become accustomed to letting his parents'
money speak instead of his own character. His room is overflowing with props that he
never uses. He has a beautiful antique typewriter that is being cobwebbed in the
corner. Marianne commented that she completely understood my inclination to spend
time at the hammock because the spot has a very placating energy. So, he goes
away for the weekend and comes back with a $300 jungle hammock that he hung once
just long enough for Coop to see and then never used it again. It's sad really.

I think she hopes for him to leave after the farming conference in Jan. So, I will
be working the farm solo for the remainder of the winter and spring. It will be
a little extra pressure, but honestly Jordan hasn't been contributing much at all
(He will sit and weed the same spot for 45 minutes) and taking half the credit when
the day is done. I'm sure he will go on to lead a charmed and frivolous life coasting
on his parents bankroll.

I went with Coop to do his install of the railings yesterday. It went off without
a hitch. Then we stopped by the store and had a beer, picked up some fried chicken
and had a really pleasant conversation about the vagaries of interpersonal relationships
and growing up on the way home. I took a bunch of pictures that I will try to send today.

Dec. 13

Clear.
Yesterday we did more mulching on the pasture side of the upper property, then
after lunch I helped Michael put in some rough cut trim in the apartment above
the garage on our neighbor Tim's property. Apparently, an old intern offered to
outfit the place for them and after he was paid he left for California. I got
to use a nailgun and a miter saw. It was fun.

I got a spider bite on my inner thigh. Marianne reccomended that I wash all my bed
linens and then gave me some peppermint oil to put in each corner of my room. It's
always nice to have clean sheets.

I haven't spoken to my mother in over a month. I used to send her journals, but
the one time I spoke to her on the phone she said, "I never know what you're talking
about, so I don't really know how to respond, LOL!" So, I stopped sending them to
her. If you guys don't mind having me, then yes I will probably make your place
home base.
